a.c. - Before meals. As in taking a medicine before meals.
a/g ratio - Albumin to globulin ratio.
ACL - Anterior cruciate ligament. ACL injuries are one of the most common ligament injuries to the knee. The ACL can be sprained or completely torn from trauma and/or degeneration.
Ad lib - At liberty. For example, a patient may be permitted to move out of bed freely and orders would, therefore, be for activities to be ad lib.
AFR - Acute renal failure
ADHD - Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
ADR - Adverse drug reaction. If a patient is taking a prescription drug to treat high blood pressure disease
AIDS - Acquired immune deficiency syndrome
AKA - Above the knee amputation.
Anuric - Not producing urine. A person who is anuric is often critical and may require dialysis.
ANED - Alive no evidence of disease. The patient arrived in the ER alive with no evidence of disease.
ADH - Antidiuretic hormone
ARDS - Acute respiratory distress syndrome.
ARF - Acute renal (kidney) failure
ASCVD - Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. A form of heart disease.
b.i.d. - Twice daily. As in taking a medicine twice daily.
bld - Blood. Blood was visible on the patient’s scalp.
Bandemia - Slang for elevated level of band forms of white blood cells.
Bibasilar - At the bases of both lungs. For example, someone with a pneumonia in both lungs might have abnormal bibasilar breath sounds.
BKA - Below the knee amputation.
BMP - Basic metabolic panel. Electrolytes (potassium, sodium, carbon dioxide, and chloride) and creatinine and glucose.
BP - Blood pressure. Blood pressure is recorded as part of the physical examination. It is one of the "vital signs."
BPD - Borderline personality disorder. A personality disorder.
BSO - Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. A BSO is the removal of both of the ovaries and adjacent Fallopian tubes and often is performed as part of a total abdominal hysterectomy.
C&S - Culture and sensitivity, performed to detect infection.
C/O - Complaint of. The patient's expressed concern.
cap - Capsule.
Ca - Cancer; carcinoma. For example, a patient who undergoing treatment for cancer should assure that they are eating and drinking enough fluids daily, both during and after treatment.
CABG. Coronary artery bypass graft. A surgery involving the heart.
CBC - Complete blood count.
CC - Chief complaint. The patient's main concern.
CDE - Complete dental (oral) evaluation.
cc - Cubic centimeters. For example, the amount of fluid removed from the body is recorded in ccs.
Chem panel - Chemistry panel. A comprehensive screening blood test that indicates the status of the liver, kidneys, and electrolytes.
CPAP - Continuous positive airway pressure. A treatment for sleep apnea.
COPD - Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
CT - Chemotherapy. A type of treatment therapy for cancer.
CVA - Cerebrovascular accident (Stroke).
D/C or DC - Discontinue or discharge. For example, a doctor will D/C a drug. Alternatively, the doctor might DC a patient from the hospital.
DCIS - Ductal Carcinoma In Situ. A type of breast cancer. The patient is receiving treatment for Ductal Carcinoma In Situ.
DDX - Differential diagnosis. A variety diagnostic possibilities are being considered to diagnose the type of cancer present in the patient.
DJD - Degenerative joint disease. Another term for osteoarthritis.
DM - Diabetes mellitus.
DNC, D&C, or D and C - Dilation and curettage. Widening the cervix and scrapping with a curette for the purpose of removing tissue lining the inner surface of the womb (uterus).
DNR - Do not resuscitate. This is a specific order not to revive a patient artificially if they succumb to illness. If a patient is given a DNR order, they are not resuscitated if they are near death and no code blue is called.
DOE - Dyspnea on exertion. Shortness of breath with activity.
DTR - Deep tendon reflexes. These are reflexes that the doctor tests by banging on the tendons with a rubber hammer.
DVT - Deep venous thrombosis (blood clot in large vein).
ETOH - Alcohol. ETOH intake history is often recorded as part of a patient history.
ECT - Electroconclusive therapy. A procedure used to control seizures (convulsions).
FX - Fracture.
g - gram, a unit of weight. The cream is available in both 30 and 60 gram tubes.
GOMER - Slang for "get out of my emergency room."
GvHD - Graft vs. host disease. It is complicated by the syndromes of acute and chronic graft-vs-host disease (GVHD).
gtt - Drops.
H&H - Hemoglobin and hematocrit. When the H & H is low, anemia is present. The H&H can be elevated in persons who have lung disease from long term smoking or from disease, such as polycythemia rubra vera.
H&P - History and physical examination.
h.s. - At bedtime. As in taking a medicine at bedtime.
H/O or h/o - History of. A past event that occurred.
HA - Headache.
HRT - Hormone replacement or hormone replacement therapy.
HTN - Hypertension.
I&D - Incision and drainage.
IBD - Inflammatory bowel disease. A name for two disorders of the gastrointestinal (BI) tract, Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis
ICD - Implantable cardioverter defibrillator
ICU - Intensive care unit. The patient was moved to the intensive care unit.
IM - Intramuscular. This is a typical notation when noting or ordering an injection (shot) given into muscle, such as with B12 for pernicious anemia.
IMP - Impression. This is the summary conclusion of the patient's condition by the healthcare professional at that particular date and time.
ITU - Intensive therapy unit
in vitro - In the laboratory
in vivo - In the body
IPF - Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. A type of lung disease.
IU - International units.
JT - Joint.
K - Potassium. An essential electrolyte frequently monitored regularly in intensive care.
KCL - Potassium chloride.
LCIS - Lobular Carcinoma In Situ. A type of cancer of the breast. The patient is receiving treatment for Lobular Carcinoma In Situ.
LBP - Low back pain. LBP is one of most common medical complaints.
LLQ - Left lower quadrant. Diverticulitis pain is often in the LLQ of the abdomen.
LUQ - Left upper quadrant. The spleen is located in the LUQ of the abdomen.
Lytes - Electrolytes (potassium, sodium, carbon dioxide, and chloride).
MCL - Medial collateral ligament.
mg - Milligrams.
M/H - Medical history
ml - Milliliters.
MVP - Mitral valve prolapse.
N/V - Nausea or vomiting.
Na - Sodium. An essential electrolyte frequently monitored regularly in intensive care.
NCP - Nursing care plan
npo - Nothing by mouth. For example, if a patient was about to undergo a surgical operation requiring general anesthesia, they may be required to avoid food or beverage prior to the procedure.
NSR - Normal sinus rhythm of the heart
O&P - Ova and parasites. Stool O & P is tested in the laboratory to detect parasitic infection in persons with chronic diarrhea.
O.D. - Right eye.
O.S. - Left eye.
O.U. - Both eyes.
ORIF - Open reduction and internal fixation, such as with the orthopedic repair of a hip fracture.
P - Pulse. Pulse is recorded as part of the physical examination. It is one of the "vital signs."
p¯ - After meals. As in take two tablets after meals.
p.o. - By mouth. From the Latin terminology per os.
p.r.n. - As needed. So that it is not always done, but done only when the situation calls for it (or example, taking a pain medication only when having pain and not without pain).
PCL - Posterior cruciate ligament.
PD - Progressive disease. Patients at risk of developing progressive disease of the kidneys include those with proteinuria or hematuria.
PERRLA - Pupils equal, round, and reactive to light and accommodation.
PFT - Pulmonary function test. A test to evaluate the how well the lungs are functioning.
PERRLA - Pupils equal, round, and reactive to light and accommodation.
Plt - Platelets, one of the blood forming elements along with the white and red blood cells.
PMI - Point of maximum impulse of the heart when felt during examination, as in beats against the chest.
PMS - Premenstrual syndrome
PT - Physical therapy
PTH - Parathyroid hormone
PTSD - Post-traumatic stress syndrome
PUD - Peptic ulcer disease. A type of ulcer of the stomach.
q.d. - Each day. As in taking a medicine daily.
q.i.d. - Four times daily. As in taking a medicine four times daily.
q2h - Every 2 hours. As in taking a medicine every 2 hours.
q3h - Every 3 hours. As in taking a medicine every 3 hours.
qAM - Each morning. As in taking a medicine each morning.
qhs - At each bedtime. As in taking a medicine each bedtime.
qod - Every other day. As in taking a medicine every other day.
qPM - Each evening. As in taking a medicine each evening.
RA - Rheumatoid arthritis. A type of joint disease.
RDS - Respiratory distress syndrome
R/O - Rule out. Doctors frequently will rule out various possible diagnoses when figuring out the correct diagnosis.
REB - Rebound, as in rebound tenderness of the abdomen when pushed in and then released.
RLQ - Right lower quadrant. The appendix is located in the RLQ of the abdomen.
ROS - Review of systems. An overall review concerns relating to the organ systems, such as the respiratory, cardiovascular, and neurologic systems.
RUQ - Right upper quadrant. The liver is located in the RUQ of the abdomen.
s/p - Status post. For example, a person who had a knee operation would be s/p a knee operation.
SAD - Season affective disorder. A type of depression that occurs during the winter months when there is little light.
SOB - Shortness of breath.
SQ - Subcutaneous. This is a typical notation when noting or ordering an injection (shot) given into the fatty tissue under the skin, such as with insulin for diabetes mellitus.
T - Temperature. Temperature is recorded as part of the physical examination. It is one of the "vital signs."
T&A - Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy
t.i.d. - Three times daily. As in taking a medicine three times daily.
tab - Tablet
TAH - Total abdominal hysterectomy
TAH - Total abdominal hysterectomy. A type of surgery to remove a woman’s uterus, Fallopian tubes, and ovaries.
THR - Total hip replacement
TKR - Total knee replacement
TMJ - Tempomandibular joint
UA or u/a - Urinalysis. A UA is a typical part of a comprehensive physical examination.
U or u** - Unit. Mistaken as the number 0 or 4, causing a 10-fold overdose or greater (for example, 4U seen as "40" or 4u seen as "44"); mistaken as "cc" so the dose is given in volume instead of units (for example, 4u seen as 4cc).
ULN - Upper limits of normal
URI - Upper respiratory infection, such as sinusitis or the common cold
ut dict - As directed. As in taking a medicine according to the instructions that the health care professional gave in the office or in the past
UTI - Urinary tract infection
VSS - Vital signs are stable. This notation means that from the standpoint of the temperature, blood pressure, and pulse, the patient is doing well.
Wt - Weight. Body weight is often recorded as part of the physical examination.
XRT - Radiotherapy (external). A type of treatment that uses radiation.